CHAPTER 1

    IN THE time before steamships, or then more frequently than now, a
stroller along the docks of any considerable sea-port would
occasionally have his attention arrested by a group of bronzed
mariners, man-of-war's men or merchant-sailors in holiday attire
ashore on liberty. In certain instances they would flank, or, like a
body-guard quite surround some superior figure of their own class,
moving along with them like Aldebaran among the lesser lights of his
constellation. That signal object was the "Handsome Sailor" of the
less prosaic time alike of the military and merchant navies. With no
perceptible trace of the vainglorious about him, rather with the
off-hand unaffectedness of natural regality, he seemed to accept the
spontaneous homage of his shipmates. A somewhat remarkable instance
recurs to me. In Liverpool, now half a century ago, I saw under the
shadow of the great dingy street-wall of Prince's Dock (an obstruction
long since removed) a common sailor, so intensely black that he must
needs have been a native African of the unadulterate blood of Ham. A
symmetric figure much above the average height. The two ends of a
gay silk handkerchief thrown loose about the neck danced upon the
displayed ebony of his chest; in his ears were big hoops of gold,
and a Scotch Highland bonnet with a tartan band set off his shapely
head.
    It was a hot noon in July; and his face, lustrous with
perspiration, beamed with barbaric good humor. In jovial sallies right
and left, his white teeth flashing into he rollicked along, the centre
of a company of his shipmates. These were made up of such an
assortment of tribes and complexions as would have well fitted them to
be marched up by Anacharsis Cloots before the bar of the first
French Assembly as Representatives of the Human Race. At each
spontaneous tribute rendered by the wayfarers to this black pagod of a
fellow- the tribute of a pause and stare, and less frequent an
exclamation,- the motley retinue showed that they took that sort of
pride in the evoker of it which the Assyrian priests doubtless
showed for their grand sculptured Bull when the faithful prostrated
themselves.
    To return.
    If in some cases a bit of a nautical Murat in setting forth his
person ashore, the Handsome Sailor of the period in question evinced
nothing of the dandified Billy-be-Damn, an amusing character all but
extinct now, but occasionally to be encountered, and in a form yet
more amusing than the original, at the tiller of the boats on the
tempestuous Erie Canal or, more likely, vaporing in the groggeries
along the tow-path. Invariably a proficient in his perilous calling,
he was also more or less of a mighty boxer or wrestler. It was
strength and beauty. Tales of his prowess were recited. Ashore he
was the champion; afloat the spokesman; on every suitable occasion
always foremost. Close-reefing top-sails in a gale, there he was,
astride the weather yard-arm-end, foot in the Flemish horse as
"stirrup," both hands tugging at the "earring" as at a bridle, in very
much the attitude of young Alexander curbing the fiery Bucephalus. A
superb figure, tossed up as by the horns of Taurus against the
thunderous sky, cheerily hallooing to the strenuous file along the
spar.
    The moral nature was seldom out of keeping with the physical make.
Indeed, except as toned by the former, the comeliness and power,
always attractive in masculine conjunction, hardly could have drawn
the sort of honest homage the Handsome Sailor in some examples
received from his less gifted associates.
    Such a cynosure, at least in aspect, and something such too in
nature, though with important variations made apparent as the story
proceeds, was welkin-eyed Billy Budd, or Baby Budd, as more familiarly
under circumstances hereafter to be given he at last came to be
called, aged twenty-one, a foretopman of the British fleet toward
the close of the last decade of the eighteenth century. It was not
very long prior to the time of the narration that follows that he
had entered the King's Service, having been impressed on the Narrow
Seas from a homeward-bound English merchantman into a seventy-four
outward-bound, H.M.S. Indomitable; which ship, as was not unusual in
those hurried days, having been obliged to put to sea short of her
proper complement of men. Plump upon Billy at first sight in the
gangway the boarding officer Lieutenant Ratcliff pounced, even
before the merchantman's crew was formally mustered on the
quarter-deck for his deliberate inspection. And him only he elected.
For whether it was because the other men when ranged before him showed
to ill advantage after Billy, or whether he had some scruples in
view of the merchantman being rather short-handed, however it might
be, the officer contented himself with his first spontaneous choice.
To the surprise of the ship's company, though much to the Lieutenant's
satisfaction, Billy made no demur. But, indeed, any demur would have
been as idle as the protest of a goldfinch popped into a cage.
    Noting this uncomplaining acquiescence, all but cheerful one might
say, the shipmates turned a surprised glance of silent reproach at the
sailor. The Shipmaster was one of those worthy mortals found in
every vocation, even the humbler ones- the sort of person whom
everybody agrees in calling "a respectable man." And- nor so strange
to report as it may appear to be- though a ploughman of the troubled
waters, life-long contending with the intractable elements, there
was nothing this honest soul at heart loved better than simple peace
and quiet. For the rest, he was fifty or thereabouts, a little
inclined to corpulence, a prepossessing face, unwhiskered, and of an
agreeable color- a rather full face, humanely intelligent in
expression. On a fair day with a fair wind and all going well, a
certain musical chime in his voice seemed to be the veritable
unobstructed outcome of the innermost man. He had much prudence,
much conscientiousness, and there were occasions when these virtues
were the cause of overmuch disquietude in him. On a passage, so long
as his craft was in any proximity to land, no sleep for Captain
Graveling. He took to heart those serious responsibilities not so
heavily borne by some shipmasters.
    Now while Billy Budd was down in the forecastle getting his kit
together, the Indomitable's Lieutenant, burly and bluff, nowise
disconcerted by Captain Graveling's omitting to proffer the
customary hospitalities on an occasion so unwelcome to him, an
omission simply caused by preoccupation of thought, unceremoniously
invited himself into the cabin, and also to a flask from the
spirit-locker, a receptacle which his experienced eye instantly
discovered. In fact he was one of those sea-dogs in whom all the
hardship and peril of naval life in the great prolonged wars of his
time never impaired the natural instinct for sensuous enjoyment. His
duty he always faithfully did; but duty is sometimes a dry obligation,
and he was for irrigating its aridity, whensoever possible, with a
fertilizing decoction of strong waters. For the cabin's proprietor
there was nothing left but to play the part of the enforced host
with whatever grace and alacrity were practicable. As necessary
adjuncts to the flask, he silently placed tumbler and water-jug before
the irrepressible guest. But excusing himself from partaking just
then, he dismally watched the unembarrassed officer deliberately
diluting his grog a little, then tossing it off in three swallows,
pushing the empty tumbler away, yet not so far as to be beyond easy
reach, at the same time settling himself in his seat and smacking
his lips with high satisfaction, looking straight at the host.
    These proceedings over, the Master broke the silence; and there
lurked a rueful reproach in the tone of his voice: "Lieutenant, you
are going to take my best man from me, the jewel of 'em."
    "Yes, I know," rejoined the other, immediately drawing back the
tumbler preliminary to a replenishing; "Yes, I know. Sorry."
    "Beg pardon, but you don't understand, Lieutenant. See here now.
Before I shipped that young fellow, my forecastle was a rat-pit of
quarrels. It was black times, I tell you, aboard the Rights here. I
was worried to that degree my pipe had no comfort for me. But Billy
came; and it was like a Catholic priest striking peace in an Irish
shindy. Not that he preached to them or said or did anything in
particular; but a virtue went out of him, sugaring the sour ones. They
took to him like hornets to treacle; all but the buffer of the gang,
the big shaggy chap with the fire-red whiskers. He indeed out of envy,
perhaps, of the newcomer, and thinking such a 'sweet and pleasant
fellow,' as he mockingly designated him to the others, could hardly
have the spirit of a game-cock, must needs bestir himself in trying to
get up an ugly row with him. Billy forebore with him and reasoned with
him in a pleasant way- he is something like myself, Lieutenant, to
whom aught like a quarrel is hateful- but nothing served. So, in the
second dog-watch one day the Red Whiskers in presence of the others,
under pretence of showing Billy just whence a sirloin steak was cut-
for the fellow had once been a butcher- insultingly gave him a dig
under the ribs. Quick as lightning Billy let fly his arm. I dare say
he never meant to do quite as much as he did, but anyhow he gave the
burly fool a terrible drubbing. It took about half a minute, I
should think. And, lord bless you, the lubber was astonished at the
celerity. And will you believe it, Lieutenant, the Red Whiskers now
really loves Billy- loves him, or is the biggest hypocrite that ever I
heard of. But they all love him. Some of 'em do his washing, darn
his old trousers for him; the carpenter is at odd times making a
pretty little chest of drawers for him. Anybody will do anything for
Billy Budd; and it's the happy family here. But now, Lieutenant, if
that young fellow goes- I know how it will be aboard the Rights. Not
again very soon shall I, coming up from dinner, lean over the
capstan smoking a quiet pipe- no, not very soon again, I think. Ay,
Lieutenant, you are going to take away the jewel of 'em; you are going
to take away my peacemaker!" And with that the good soul had really
some ado in checking a rising sob.
    "Well," said the officer who had listened with amused interest
to all this, and now waxing merry with his tipple; "Well, blessed
are the peacemakers, especially the fighting peacemakers! And such are
the seventy-four beauties some of which you see poking their noses out
of the port-holes of yonder war-ship lying-to for me," pointing
thro' the cabin window at the Indomitable. "But courage! don't look so
downhearted, man. Why, I pledge you in advance the royal
approbation. Rest assured that His Majesty will be delighted to know
that in a time when his hard tack is not sought for by sailors with
such avidity as should be; a time also when some shipmasters privily
resent the borrowing from them a tar or two for the service; His
Majesty, I say, will be delighted to learn that one shipmaster at
least cheerfully surrenders to the King, the flower of his flock, a
sailor who with equal loyalty makes no dissent.- But where's my
beauty? Ah," looking through the cabin's open door, "Here he comes;
and, by Jove- lugging along his chest- Apollo with his portmanteau!-
My man," stepping out to him, "you can't take that big box aboard a
war-ship. The boxes there are mostly shot-boxes. Put your duds in a
bag, lad. Boot and saddle for the cavalryman, bag and hammock for
the man-of-war's man."
    The transfer from chest to bag was made. And, after seeing his man
into the cutter and then following him down, the Lieutenant pushed off
from the Rights-of-Man. That was the merchant-ship's name; tho' by her
master and crew abbreviated in sailor fashion into The Rights. The
hard-headed Dundee owner was a staunch admirer of Thomas Paine whose
book in rejoinder to Burke's arraignment of the French Revolution
had then been published for some time and had gone everywhere. In
christening his vessel after the title of Paine's volume, the man of
Dundee was something like his contemporary shipowner, Stephen Girard
of Philadelphia, whose sympathies, alike with his native land and
its liberal philosophers, he evinced by naming his ships after
Voltaire, Diderot, and so forth.
    But now, when the boat swept under the merchantman's stern, and
officer and oarsmen were noting- some bitterly and others with a
grin,- the name emblazoned there; just then it was that the new
recruit jumped up from the bow where the coxswain had directed him
to sit, and waving his hat to his silent shipmates sorrowfully looking
over at him from the taffrail, bade the lads a genial good-bye.
Then, making a salutation as to the ship herself, "And good-bye to you
too, old Rights-of-Man."
    "Down, Sir!" roared the Lieutenant, instantly assuming all the
rigour of his rank, though with difficulty repressing a smile.
    To be sure, Billy's action was a terrible breach of naval decorum.
But in that decorum he had never been instructed; in consideration
of which the Lieutenant would hardly have been so energetic in reproof
but for the concluding farewell to the ship. This he rather took as
meant to convey a covert sally on the new recruit's part, a sly slur
at impressment in general, and that of himself in especial. And yet,
more likely, if satire it was in effect, it was hardly so by
intention, for Billy, tho' happily endowed with the gayety of high
health, youth, and a free heart, was yet by no means of a satirical
turn. The will to it and the sinister dexterity were alike wanting. To
deal in double meanings and insinuations of any sort was quite foreign
to his nature.
    As to his enforced enlistment, that he seemed to take pretty
much as he was wont to take any vicissitude of weather. Like the
animals, though no philosopher, he was, without knowing it,
practically a fatalist. And, it may be, that he rather liked this
adventurous turn in his affairs, which promised an opening into
novel scenes and martial excitements.
    Aboard the Indomitable our merchant-sailor was forthwith rated
as an able-seaman and assigned to the starboard watch of the fore-top.
He was soon at home in the service, not at all disliked for his
unpretentious good looks and a sort of genial happy-go-lucky air. No
merrier man in his mess: in marked contrast to certain other
individuals included like himself among the impressed portion of the
ship's company; for these when not actively employed were sometimes,
and more particularly in the last dog-watch when the drawing near of
twilight induced revery, apt to fall into a saddish mood which in some
partook of sullenness. But they were not so young as our foretopman,
and no few of them must have known a hearth of some sort; others may
have had wives and children left, too probably, in uncertain
circumstances, and hardly any but must have had acknowledged kith
and kin, while for Billy, as will shortly be seen, his entire family
was practically invested in himself.